158
FXUS64 KFWD 271218 AAA
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
618 AM CST Fri Dec 27 2019


.AVIATION...
/12z TAFs/

Concerns and Challenges: MVFR cigs/vsbys, w/isolated IFR conditions
possible across DFW Metro airports through 15z. IFR- LIFR vsbys
in FG/BR at Waco. Veering of winds with old stationary front near
I-20 lifting northward by 16z and after. Return of MVFR cigs by
06z/after Saturday and increasing -SHRA chances toward 12z
Saturday.

Very challenging cig/vsby forecast this morning, as a stationary
front continues to straddle areas between I-20 and HWY 380 near
DFW early this morning. Areas of BR/MVFR, w/patchy IFR/LIFR/FG
conditions were occurring north of this front, especially across
the immediate Red River Valley. I don`t expect much more than
brief TEMPO MVFR cigs and/or vsbys across the DFW Metro airports,
though AFW will have to be monitored closely as they are closer to
the more moisture rich near-surface layer. Otherwise, this
stationary front will surge north as a warm front and out of the
area just before 18z. SE winds will increase to between 10-12
knots with a few gusts of 15-20 knots as low level warm air
advection cranks up ahead of an approaching longwave trough. MVFR
cigs and possibly a few SHRA will occur tonight, as a 30-40 knot,
southerly 925mb LLJ shifts right over the I-35 corridor by 06z
Saturday. With limited instability and uncertainty on TS -- I have
decided to let later TAFs address that potential as we get to 12z
Saturday and beyond with the arrival of our mid level trough.

Waco is seeing IFR/LIFR in BR/FG this morning, but do to more
radiational cooling impacts as a lead shortwave and associated
high clouds have shifted east into the Lower MS Valley. Similar to
DFW, I expect conditions will improve to VFR by 15z-16z, as
southeast winds increase from the SE at 10-15 knots and gusty,
with surface temperatures readily warming up to well above normal
values this afternoon. Occasional VFR cigs this afternoon will
readily fall into MVFR category, likely BLO FL020 by or just
before 06z Saturday.

05/

&&


.SHORT TERM... /Issued 346 AM CST Fri Dec 27 2019/

/Today/

Yet another very warm and relatively humid day with regard to
normal sensible weather usually seen for the end of December.
Challenges this morning include the potential for fog/drizzle,
with patchy dense fog along and north of the Highway 380 corridor
near and north of a stalled surface front. A secondary challenge
is the potential for isolated to scattered showers and
thunderstorms developing across our far north and northwest
counties this morning. It appears these areas will be along the
eastern periphery of stronger 925mb flow and enhanced low level
warm advection across across West and Northwest Texas.

As we await better mid-level height falls and ascent with the
aforementioned approaching mid level trough, a surface cold front
will continue to be held at bay across areas north of I-20 to the
Red River where cooler temperatures through the morning ours will
combine with southerly 925-850mb flow overriding the frontal
inversion. Fog and some some patchy drizzle has already formed
along/north of Highway 380, including northern reaches of the DFW
Metroplex. Though we expect occasional pockets of visibilities to
fall below a mile across these areas, visibility values will
bounce up and down thanks to lingering ascent occurring aloft.
Widespread and persistent dense fog doesn`t appear likely and will
forego any Dense Fog Advisory issuance this morning across the
northern tier counties. However, folks traveling across this area
through mid to late morning will need to be aware that
fluctuations in visibility will make commuting challenging at
times. Another area of patchy fog and drizzle will be possible
across Central Texas, but is not expected to be widespread or
dense at this time.

As for rainfall today, several CAMs continue to hint at warm
advection-induced and mainly elevated showers and isolated
thunderstorms developing north of the surface front from our
northwest CWA -- northward into Northwest TX and western OK from
sunrise through mid-late morning. The two things that have me not
overly confident on advertising higher PoPs across these areas is
the expected subsidence behind our departing early morning mid
level impulse and the presence of an elevated mixed layer(EML)
centered around 700mb.

Look for the stagnant stationary front across the northern CWA to
lift readily northward away from the area as a warm front this
afternoon. This will allow surface winds to veer to the southeast
and increase to between 10 to 15 mph with occasional gusts.
Despite plenty of cloudiness lingering this afternoon across the
region, occasional peaks of sun combined with increasing low level
warm advection should allow high temperatures this afternoon to
peak between 65 and 75 degrees. Normal high temperatures this time
of the year are in the mid-upper 50s, so get outside and enjoy
the warmth. A rogue shower or two is possible across parts of the
area, but nothing of significance with only spotty, very light
rainfall amounts expected.

05/

&&

.LONG TERM... /Issued 346 AM CST Fri Dec 27 2019/

/Tonight through next Thursday/

A slightly more amplified pattern across the Southern Plains will
result in a couple of rain/storm chances through the long term
forecast period. At this time, the potential for widespread severe
convection appears to be limited due to the lack of instability.
However, we will need to monitor this risk across East Texas on
Saturday closely. Thereafter, we will have a few days with no
precipitation across the region with the next shot for rain close
to the start of 2020.

For tonight, the WAA regime will persist as 850-700mb flow
increases ahead of a stout upper trough that will approach from
the Trans-Pecos region. With moisture being trapped beneath a
modest inversion and capped off with dry air, there should be a
potential for patchy drizzle and some patchy fog area-wide this
evening. As the upper trough approaches after midnight Saturday,
the inversion should lift, weaken and the entire column is
expected to saturate. Implied divergence on the nose of 125 knot
300mb jet should yield large scale ascent and given the moist
airmass, I expect widespread showers to develop across western
North Texas and the Big Country. Given that profiles are largely
moist adiabatic---thus poor lapse rates---I feel that the risk
for widespread thunder only warrants a mention of isolated wording
in the forecast. Showers and embedded thunderstorms will slowly
march east.

Through the day on Saturday, convection will continue, especially
after daybreak as a Pacific front trudges eastward through North
and Central Texas. While deep layer shear is impressive as a 70 to
80 knot jet streak noses in across the region, instability is
expected to be meager with only a few hundred joules of CAPE
forecast thanks to what should be extensive rain and cloud cover.
If the coverage of cloud cover/rain is less than expected and/or
updrafts are simply more robust than anticipated, a severe weather
threat could materialize. At this time, this appears most
unlikely, though parts of East Texas do have a slightly greater
risk for more organized convective modes given the shear and
deeper moisture (and thus greater instability). Some hi-res
guidance does imply that another round of convection---tied closer
to the true front---will transpire closer to the I-35 corridor
Saturday afternoon. At this time, it`s unclear as to the
plausibility of this, but I`ll hold on to PoPs a little later
closer to the I-35 corridor to account for this potential. Should
severe weather materialize, the main hazard would be gusty outflow
winds and perhaps a low-end hail risk given the shear.

Rain/storms should exit stage right Saturday evening with dry
westerly surface flow overspreading the region. This dry west flow
should be the mitigating factor for a radiation fog event. If
surface winds go calm, there could be the potential for yet
another round of fog. I`ll abstain from mentioning fog in the
forecast at this time, but the Saturday night - Sunday morning
wind forecast will need to be re-assessed.

Sunday through most Tuesday appears largely uneventful across
North/Central Texas as we prepare to say goodbye to 2019. Some of
the blended guidance guidance does advertise some decent rain
chances on New Year`s Eve, but deterministic GFS and ECMWF output
would suggest shortwave ridging. I`m inclined to lean on some of
the drier blended guidance given the upper air pattern. I`ll only
advertise a low risk for showers New Year`s Eve into the early
part of New Year`s Day. Rain chances will ramp up, especially
across East and Central Texas as we start 2020 (late New Year`s
Day) as another deep trough ejects out of the Pacific Southwest.
Rain chances appear that they will dwindle through the day on
Thursday. Temperatures to start off 2020 will be within a few
degrees of climatological norms.

Bain

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    71  61  69  44  57 /  20  50 100  20   0
Waco                72  61  70  42  64 /   5  30  90  20   0
Paris               69  59  67  45  58 /  20  30 100  50   0
Denton              69  60  68  41  55 /  20  60 100  10   0
McKinney            70  60  68  44  56 /  20  40 100  20   0
Dallas              72  61  69  46  58 /  20  50 100  20   0
Terrell             72  61  70  45  60 /  20  30  90  30   0
Corsicana           73  61  70  46  62 /  20  20  90  30   0
Temple              72  60  70  44  63 /   5  30  90  20   0
Mineral Wells       69  58  65  40  54 /  20  60  90   5   0

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

05/24