295
FXUS64 KFWD 112041
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
341 PM CDT Fri Oct 11 2019

.LONG TERM...
/Saturday Night through Friday/

The extended portion of the forecast will remain a little more
active as the upper pattern will feature periodic shortwaves
through the central U.S. The cold high pressure currently building
into the region will have shifted off to the east by Saturday
evening allowing weak southerly flow to return. With an increase
in cloud cover, temperatures should be about 10-12 degrees warmer
by early Sunday morning. Low and mid tropospheric flow will
strengthen overnight Saturday night in response to a large upper
low over the Great Lakes. As it does, a weak impulse will race
through the Southern Plains late overnight. While we will still be
generally void of low level moisture, strong isentropic ascent
and moisture advection between 700-500 mb will result in thick mid
level cloud cover. These types of setups often result in
widespread elevated radar echoes indicative of precipitation which
may or may not make it to the ground deepening on how dry the sub
cloud layer is. Given the expected strong mid level ascent within
an area of modest lapse rates, we`ll have some 20% PoPs for
potential elevated showers and perhaps a rumble of thunder. This
would mainly be late Saturday night into early Sunday morning.
Sunday should otherwise be a nice day with the disturbance passing
well east of the area by afternoon, and skies becoming sunny.
Highs should top out in the mid to upper 70s.

Attention quickly turns to an early week system that has at least
some potential to produce heavy rainfall across parts of North
Texas, mainly on Tuesday. We`ll be monitoring a synoptic setup
favorable for producing a predecessor rain event (PRE) across
parts of the region. This setup features a tropical cyclone over
the eastern Pacific which has mid and high level moisture
exhausted off to the northeast over the high terrain of Mexico and
into Texas. Meanwhile, a mid level trough will be swinging
through the Plains allowing a strong upper jet to be positioned
favorable over North Texas. In the low levels, moisture will
rapidly be transported northward in response to upstream surface
pressure falls in the Plains. This rapid low level moistening
occurs as the upper levels have already been primed by the
tropical system. This results in a rapid column moistening and is
indicated by PWs climbing from just under 1" early Monday morning
to almost 2.1" overnight Monday night. With strong forcing aloft
from the passing shortwave and favorable jet dynamics, we could
see a band of very heavy rainfall somewhere across North or
Central Texas beginning late Monday night into Tuesday. At this
time there are still some uncertainties as to how this will play
out. The tropical system in the eastern Pacific is still just an
area of disturbed weather and does not have any established upper
outflow. Model guidance is in good agreement though with a
tropical cyclone developing over the weekend, and also shows a
good upper level moisture connection into North Texas early next
week. Guidance also has consensus with some heavier QPF amounts
across North and East Texas late Monday into Tuesday. While these
amounts shouldn`t be used explicitly, they do signal a surge of
moisture into the region along with supporting dynamics for a
heavy rainfall event. All that being said, we`ll have some fairly
high PoPs late Monday night into Tuesday and continue to monitor
this closely given the recent rainfall across the region.

Rain chances should diminish with the passage of a cold front on
Wednesday, although we`ll still hang on to some low level moisture
into the end of the week. Temperatures will top out in the 80s on
Monday and Tuesday with 70s behind the front Wednesday through the
end of the week.

Dunn

&&

.SHORT TERM... /Issued 101 PM CDT Fri Oct 11 2019/
/Through Saturday afternoon/

Synopsis: The coldest temperatures since last March are expected
tonight. While a widespread freeze is not anticipated, patchy
frost will be possible north and west of DFW, and precautions will
need to be taken to protect sensitive vegetation. Saturday looks
to be a beautiful day with highs in the 60s under sunny skies.

What a difference 24 hours can make! This time yesterday,
Dallas/Fort Worth was sitting at 88 F (on its way to a high of 92
F), and now, we find DFW at 50 F (after a morning low of 43 F).
The low of 43 F this morning was one degree above the record low
for this date set back in 1932 and 1990. A similar story at Waco
where a morning low of 43 F was observed, which is also one degree
above its record for this date set in 1990 and 1994.

North and Central Texas this afternoon are in the wake of a strong
cold front, now near the Gulf Coast. Strong cold air advection is
underway across the interior CONUS as a stout 1037 mb high builds
over the Rocky Mountains. This frigid air mass has brought much
below average temperatures to most of the country between the
Mississippi River and the Sierra Nevada (near zero, and in some
cases, sub-zero temperatures were seen in parts of the high
Rockies this morning). Closer to home, a band of rain showers
continues across our southeastern counties, near the 850 mb cold
front. These showers should move on out during the next few hours.

Tonight, the surface high will build farther south, bringing
light winds and clear skies to much of North Texas. This will
allow for excellent radiational cooling, with lows likely to fall
into the 30s for much of the region. The exceptions will be parts
of Central Texas where some cloud cover will linger, and in the
urban core of the Dallas/Fort Worth Metropolitan Area. North and
west of DFW, some patchy frost will be possible as temperatures
fall into the mid 30s. We do not anticipate any widespread
freezing conditions tonight, thus will not issue any Freeze
Warnings at this time. That being said, some low spots or
sheltered locations across parts of Young, Jack, Stephens, and
Montague Counties could see a light freeze, though the grids do
not explicitly show sub-freezing temperatures. With the growing
season nearly complete, opted to not issue a Frost Advisory
either, but will continue to highlight potential for frost in
DSS/social media products. People north of Interstate 20 and west
of U.S. Highway 281 are urged to take precautions to protect
sensitive vegetation.

Saturday looks to be beautiful. After a cool start, temperatures
should climb into the 60s with abundant sunshine. Winds will start
out from the north to northeast, but should gradually veer out of
the east-southeast to southeast by late afternoon. Some cloud
cover may continue in parts of Central Texas, but a solid mix of
clouds and sun appears likely. Simply put, tomorrow could not
really be any better for outdoor activities.

Godwin

&&

.AVIATION... /Issued 1237 PM CDT Fri Oct 11 2019/
/18Z TAFs/

Concerns -- SHRA continuing for KACT. Gusty northerly winds.
Return to south flow late Saturday.

A strong cold front passed through North and Central TX...leaving
gusty northerly winds in its wake. Sustained winds of 15-20 KT
along with gusts to around 25 KT will continue at all terminals
through early evening. While precipitation has moved out of the
Metroplex...a solid line of SHRA continues across Central TX. The
bulk of this SHRA has moved through KACT...but some spotty SHRA
activity may continue for another few hours...resulting in brief
reductions in visibility and cigs below 3 kft AGL. SHRA should
come to an end late this afternoon.

Saturday looks to be a beautiful day. VFR and light winds are
expected at all terminals. DFW should be able to see a return to
south flow operations by mid-afternoon as high pressure slides off
to the east.

37

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    40  65  53  77  62 /   0   0  20  10   0
Waco                41  63  53  79  62 /   5   5  20  10   5
Paris               37  62  46  70  54 /   0   0  10  10   0
Denton              36  64  51  78  59 /   0   0  20   5   0
McKinney            36  65  50  75  58 /   0   0  20  10   0
Dallas              42  67  54  77  62 /   0   0  20  10   0
Terrell             38  65  51  76  59 /   0   0  20  20   5
Corsicana           41  64  52  74  60 /   5   5  20  20   5
Temple              41  63  53  78  62 /   5  10  10   5   0
Mineral Wells       36  65  49  80  59 /   0   5  20   5   0

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

91